You'll need more under present circumstances
that can be provided by the raw materials that you
now have in your inventory.
So a determination has to be made of how much raw
materials do you need in the long term? And what do
you do about getting them? Because it's a very
peculiar raw material, and it occurs in very
minute quantities on the Earth's surface and in
various forms. And it is extremely costly to get
and refine to start moving.
After a year's work on That problem, it became
evident that we were going to have to have one of the
largest searches for the material that anybody
could imagine in the United States. And other
places too, but primarily in the United States.
And that several different processes were going
to have to be developed to bring the material out of
its whatever state that it was in. to uranium
oxide, something that you could start to process
in the system, and that this was going to be quite
costly. Then plans had to be made and rules made,
laws made, to, as a way of implementing it. And this
is when there began to be rewards for uranium of
various concentrations, and we got the miners and
the prospectors all stirred up out west and going
over the hill, and sure enough we came up with the
materials. Did you work with the U.S. Geological
Survey on this? Oh, we worked with everybody. Yes,
them too, but mostly the AEC did most of it by
itself. We worked with everybody. But there are
all kinds of approaches to this. For instance, in
Florida, there's enough uranium in the
phosphates down there that
was a substantial quantity of it. But to use it, you
have to refine it in such a way that you come out with
a different kind of phosphate fertilizer than
you're producing from there now.
So you have to re-educate all the farmers. to the
use of the new kind of fertilizer before you could
make the thing even approach being economical.
So you do better to get your Randy Moore from some
other sources, even though it's more costly, as
long as you could do it. There are a number of
projects, use that as one example, there are a
number of problems like that. But we did develop a
system that did get us the uranium we need. And
where did we get it from? I thought we got our
uranium from South America. I mean South Africa.
South Africa, yes. We got quite a bit of the initial
uranium from South Africa. And we're still
getting some, at least as of the time I got out of the
Patriot. But not a great deal. Most of it we get from
my own west, Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, a lot
of the mines out there are still rolling. So that
was one of the major issues. That was one of the
major early things, yes. Of course, in the stories
in the weapons development side of the thing that I
really can't talk completely fascinating.
All of the testing and whatnot. As of the time I got
left AC,
I had seen and witnessed more nuclear detonations
than anybody in the world except one man who was in
the AEC out there, or was in Los Alamos. And he's not
dead. How many was there? Ooh, I don't know. I
don't think I could even count them up. Most people
say three, four, five, six maybe.
I was probably somewhere around a hundred, I don't
know exactly, but way up there. Well, we're going
to talk about those. Some big ones. We're going to
talk about those and of course some of the
implications of testing underground and above
ground, but let's go back to the job as executive
director. What were some of the other issues
besides finding uranium, and as far as how many
bombs are needed? Well, the type of weapons,
whether you build them for
torpedoes, for example, whether you build them as
bombs, whether you build them the other delivery
systems that come in, like the V-1s, the Army's
gun, all those things were being considered at
that time, and they were
pretty hard. Of
course, the whole question of the Superbomb and
the hydrogen bomb and whatnot all came up during
that length of time. We got way over our head in
cryogenics that we'd never been involved in
before. What are cryogenics? Cryogenics is the
science of low temperatures. Most all of the stuff
in connection with the H-bomb at that time had to be
handled minus 270 or minus 454 degrees
Fahrenheit.
Have these tremendous duars that are filled with
liquid nitrogen that you have to use to keep it to
this temperature and keep it filled and make your
own nitrogen in the process and fly this stuff.
It's a tremendous problem.
I forgot the basic thing I was talking about. We're
talking about the issues. So just the H-bomb
thing, if that dominated the whole thing, would be
enough to keep you more than occupied during that
period of time. The testing, where can you test,
how can you test, can you test above ground,
underground,
of the testing and the radioactivity. All of those
were major issues during that period of time.
Tremendous problems on going forward on nuclear
airplanes and that nuclear ramjet was a real
problem during that period of time.
the time we had to acquire ARCO, Idaho, build that
tremendous test station out there. The other
thing that we were trying to get going on then, the
peaceful uses of it, particularly reactors. We
built the first reactors out there, and we built
the first plutonium reactor out there.
The expansion of
the diffusion plants
to produce U-235 was a major issue. The
construction of additional reactors at the
commission's facilities, particularly at
Hanford, to produce more plutonium. That was an
issue.
Construction of Rocky Flats at Denver, another
big one. I was wondering about the relations
between the AEC and the Department of Defense.
Well, overall they were generally not the best. or
in the early stages. Not that there was something
wrong with the people, but the whole philosophy of
the United States at that time was to keep the
military out of the atomic business, because
everybody was scared of that. They were looking
for a peaceful world where there were no atomic
bombs or no atomic threats.
All of which is great, but
Most of us couldn't see it going that way. It just
wasn't going that way. The United Nations were
being organized, and one of my jobs when I was on the
Joint Strategic Plan staff was to serve as
assistant to the military representative to the
United Nations, military staff committee of the
United Nations. So while, and boy, if you talk
about a frustrating experience, that is one of
them.
And so there were many of us that just thought that
we had to get along, and it made no difference
whether we belonged to or not. And we did, and
worked at it hard. And some of the commissioners
were,
in a way, I mean, leaned in that direction.
Anti-military? Well, not so much anti-military
as they were going to put this thing peacefully to
bed. They weren't necessarily discrediting the
military, but some way this couldn't have this
bomb in a military application way.
Not all the commissioners felt that way, and since
they worked hard to do their job, I have to give the
commissioners credit, at least the early ones,
because they worked real hard at it.
But as it went on down the road, the major user that
AEC had, had to be defense. There's all these other
things, reactors, nuclear power, isotopes, all
of the peaceful uses, all the wonderful things.
They are wonderful. They're going to come, but as
it turns out, it's going to take centuries rather
than decades.
And so pretty soon, you're in bed with the military
whether you like it or not, because that's really
all you're doing. And in the meantime, it's
becoming urgently aware for
everybody to see that it's essential for survival
of the United States that you have a capability.
And so as these things become apparent, then
relations, of course, improved, improved,
improved.
So they got to the point where we're working
together very real well, real well. At this time,
in 1950, the North Koreans attacked South Korea,
and I was wondering what impact that had on you
people in the nuclear or in the atomic bomb
business. I don't really think it had any,
because we were already geared up doing whatever
we were going to do. And the thing wasn't long
enough,
and the means used didn't impact us in such a way as
to change what we were doing. I'm sure that it
caused the planners an awful lot of worry, but of
course I wasn't in the planning then, I was in the
doing.
So I don't think on the atomic side the impact was
really, well
there must have been some right this minute. I
don't think of what it might have been. Okay. Of
course, just a couple of years after that, we have
the problem between the President and General
MacArthur. And I was wondering, well, he made some
statements about actually using atomic weapons
and bombing in Manchuria, and I was wondering what
the Air Force thought about that. I just don't
know. I wasn't in the Air Force at that time, and I
don't honestly know. but you were liaison
between the Defense Department and the AEC, so was
there any discussion, when he made statements
like that, was there any discussion that you
remember? No, not between those agencies, no. I'm
sure there were plenty of discussions in the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and those places,
that problem would not get to be a part of the
military liaison committee. Okay. What was your
personal opinion of firing the general? Well, I
regretted very much that it had to happen, insofar
as the specifics were concerned. I didn't know the
answer, didn't know the fact, and so I just didn't
have a proper opinion. I've always thought that,
even in retrospect, that Truman was a little bit
hasty.
But also, I know MacArthur, and I can understand
it. I sure can understand it. At this same time, of
course, we have the McCarthyism and the Red Scare
period, and most government officials, if not all
government officials, were supposed to sign
loyalty pledges. Were you supposed to sign one,
and did you? Well, let me see.
This program was started in 1947. I would have
without any qualms at the time, but it didn't
bother me either way. But I don't remember ever
having to do it. I feel pretty sure that I never did,
never had occasion to sign one. Senator McCarthy
went after the Secretary of the Army, Stevens.
What was your opinion and other general officers'
opinion in the Air Force? People that you knew,
your colleagues that you talked to. Well, most of
us just thought it was a way of McCarthy
making a splash.
we thought Stevens had his shortcomings just like
anybody else, but they weren't the kind of things
that McCarthy was trying to prove. And of course
our sympathy was all for Stevens and getting him
cleared and back on his job.
And I detested the McCarthy approach to the thing.
I don't know. That brought into question the whole
patriotism Yes, that's what it amounts to. Of
course,
that's not right. The armed services are
patriotic enough. They'll stand.
And we detested the whole damn thing, but there
wasn't anything we could do about it except stand
on the sidelines.
In 1951 you switched jobs. Why was that? You became
deputy chief of the Armed Forces Special Weapons
Project, a project which later in 1954 you became
chief in which you stayed for six and a half years.
Did you get two stars then? Well why did you switch
and tell me about getting two stars.
An Air Force officer on duty in Washington really
should grow out of his job in three years.
If he doesn't, maybe better start looking at him.
And I was trying to grow, and I thought I had done
about all I could do with the MLC job.
By that time, the relationship between the
Department of Defense and AEC had developed to
such an extent that the Multilateral Liaison
Committee wasn't really necessary anymore,
except as a channel, as a conduit and a postdoc. And
as a matter of fact, I had reduced the staff to
recognize this and didn't have very much of a staff
left.
So, I thought it's time to get out and turn over to
something else. The Armed Forces Special Weapons
Project was the place I went as deputy commander.
And it was a project born When the Atomic Energy
Commission was created, there were a number of
residual functions connected with atomic energy
that need to or had to, as the case may be, stay in the
military, in the Department of Defense.
They set up this agency to take care of that and left
General Groves in command of it and made it
answerable to the three chiefs of staff
separately, Chief of Staff, Army, Navy, Air
Force. And it operated that way.
It's had many jobs, but its two big jobs were to take
the orders
approved through the military liaison committee
and the commission for weapons, and to see that
they were produced in accordance with those
specifications.
and to determine any characteristics of the
weapons that were necessary to determine in the
process, to accept those weapons when they were
produced, to take care of them and store them and
have custody of them and keep anybody else from
having custody of them.
which turns out to be a pretty damn big order before
you get through it. The other major job they had was
to take whatever actions were necessary to
develop a comprehensive handbook of the effects
of atomic weapons on all kinds of targets and
materials and other things.
And so we handled all of the atomic weapons effects
tests and participation in testing, military
participation in testing.
I had a headquarters in Washington in the Pentagon
and a field command at Sandia Base in Albuquerque,
New Mexico, adjacent to the Sandia Corporation
out there. And then various weapons storage,
repair, and rehabilitation places all over the
United States that we built. I built five of them
myself.
And so I took over as deputy to General Loper, who
was an Army general.
So that first Two and a half or three years, I've
forgotten exactly. Three years. And then he
retired and I took it over.
For another three years. And as of the time that
Engine Charlie Wilson came into defense, he took
it out from under the chiefs of the three services
and put it under the Secretary of Defense. So I
answered to him. And what difference did that
make? I mean, did that make a difference? Instead
of you being under the JCS, now you're under the
Secretary of Defense? Yes, I wasn't under the JCS.
I was under the services individually. Oh, you
were under each service individually. Each
service. I was responsible to the chief of naval
operations, chief of staff of the Air Force, chief
of staff of the Army. So it was probably a little bit
more cumbersome then, wasn't it? Well, it really
wasn't. If you've got the kind of personality and
confidence to work in it, it makes it real easy.
Because what you did is go and sit down and talk with
them about their problems and write them a letter
to tell them that's what you're going to do.
an initial letter and sent it back to you and that's
all you got. Well why did Wilson change it then? Was
it an attempt to make it more streamlined? Well you
may remember when he went in there there was a lot of
talk about the military, the generals running
every damn thing in Washington and why not. You go
through these cycles all the time. Roger Kyes was
his deputy. I don't know if you know him or not. No, I
don't. How do you spell his name? K-e-y-e-s. Kyes,
he calls it.
He was in command of the Chevrolet division of
General Motors. That makes sense. He came in as his
deputy, and he ate General's breakfast, you see.
far as the stories go.
Great big guy, about six foot four I suspect, four
or five. Ugliest man I ever saw in my life.
Gruff, gruff as hell.
But a real fine guy.
Fine in what way? Well, he make a hell of a lot of
noise and stir up a lot of things, but if he believed
in you, and you said this is the way it is, by God,
he'd go die for that. I
had to go and see Wilson about something, and I've
forgotten what the hell it was. I got to talking to
guys while I was up there. And then he wanted a
presentation about what this outfit did, what we
were doing down there. So I told him I would be up
whenever it was. He asked me sometime next day. And
I'd have some charts showing where it fit in the
organization. And I went up and explained the
whole damn thing to him. He was so fascinated by it,
because he didn't know anything about that
business, that he called Wilson to come in and sit
down and have me go through the whole damn thing
again. So I took there a whole afternoon, a busy
afternoon it was. At least for me it was.
When I got through, Wilson said, I think that's
something we ought to run from up here. I don't know
what happened after that, but it was run from up
there. It
wasn't any real problem. I knew what the chiefs
wanted and I kept them informed and I did that.
There wasn't much argument about The real touchy
part was, who had the weapons and were they being
taken care of? And I knew the answer to that, so was
everybody else. It
wasn't a real problem. You had to be diplomatic,
and you had to honor everybody's desires. If it
fit, if it didn't, why tell them so? And they'd haul
in. A real fine bunch of gentlemen to work with,
anyway. Well, I want to talk a little bit about, can
you tell me about Wilson? Engine Charlie?
Well,
from that point on, I got to know him better.
spent some time with him on some of his long trips. I
went out to, and we talked with him, to some of the
nuclear tests. And it's a hell of a long ways out
there. You can do a little bit of talking. Sure. And
then saw him on strictly business, of course,
quite often back here in the Pentagon.
A real fine man, a very able man.
We were beginning to get the kind of policies in the
United States by the time he was in there that
made it awful hard for a Secretary of Defense to
really do the job. Because a lot of people want the
Defense Department dismantled, and you have to
fight like the devil for any kind of money that you
need to do something with.
And it became harder and harder and harder for him
to get moving, to keep a defense establishment
like he thought it ought to be. What kind of
administrator was he? I
guess that wasn't clear, except that he left most
of it to Roger Kye. And Kye was pretty damn good, as
long as everybody did what he told them.
If they didn't, he fired them. And as long as they
get by with that, well, that works. There are some
people you can't fire. It gets to be a problem. And
he hit that kind of problem. Well, when was that? In
the latter part of the administration. He tried to
fire a general? No, no, he could fire the general.
That's what I thought. But he tried to fire a
political appointee. Yeah, and he got crossed up
with.
What about General Groves? Well, Donald Groves
was a,
what about him and what kind of man was he? Yeah,
what kind of man was he? What type of administrator
was he? What type of relations did you have with
him? He was a fine administrator for the kind of
problem he had, and of course I guess that's the
definition of a good administrator. I don't think
that under
the kind of problems we have administering
something now, with a war not going on or no urgency
or whatnot, he probably would not have shined as an
administrator. But people had to do what he told
them to do at that time and did. And he did, he told
them the right thing. They did a hell of a good job.
I'd have to say he's a very good administrator for
the job that he had.
And of course it was a very difficult job because of
the kind of people that had to have working for you
and the fact that it was all so secret that nobody
could know anything. So I think he did a good job and
was a good man. And I didn't know him until after all
this was over and OPSWAP was created and he's head
of the Armed Forces Special Weapons Party. In
other words, in 1 January of 47, or late 46. I might
have known him a little bit, but after that I did.
And then I had him as my consultant and after he
retired and left, both while I was in Ashwaub and
later in the Atomic Energy Commission. So I got to
know him quite well and I got to admire him. What did
you admire about him? His absolute
determination for one thing.
If there wasn't one way to skin the cat, he could
find some other one and do it. He believed what he
believed and nothing shook it.
He
was persistent and worked at whatever objective
he had in mind, really worked at it. And he was a very
intelligent guy, somebody very interesting to
talk to, interesting to discuss things with, and
had views on everything.
So I liked him. Now there's another man that I want
to talk about, who although you at this time
weren't involved in this, still and the Air Force
itself you weren't that involved with. I'm
interested in Curtis LeMay and the problems of the
rise of the Strategic Air Command. You must have
had some relations with LeMay. You must have heard
stories about him or formed some opinion about him
and the Strategic Air Command. There are even
movies about SAC in the 1950s. It was glorified.
What were your feelings about that? Well,
I guess LeMay was a major, captain or major, when I
first met him. And that was in connection with
these navigation flights back in 1937 off the West
Coast. And I didn't know him very well, but he was
one of the four or five qualified celestial
navigators that we had, as well as pilot and all the
other things.
He was entrusted with the secrets of the most
secret thing we had at that time, a northern bomb
site.
And so I kind of held him in awe as a new second
lieutenant. But then I didn't know anything more
about him until
the B-29s and I was in India in the position we've
already talked about.
And we planned and built for and accommodated the
B-29 operations out of India, through China,
against Japan, and back down that route. And, of
course, LeMay was in command of that. So, I got to
know him and deal with him in India
quite a bit on
Well, the mundane things, logistic support and
how do you hell do you get gasoline to Chengdu, and
how can we get Chiang Kai-shek to get another
million coolies fixing the runway, and this sort
of thing. I got to like him pretty well, but he's not
the kind of guy you get close to, or that I get close
to,
anyhow.
Then, back in Washington, he was there before he
went to Tsai.
And after, too, for that matter, but before, when
he was there. We did a lot of skate shooting
together, and I got to know him that way.
Then when I was in MLC and later in AFSWAP, of course
I dealt directly with him while he was in command of
SAC, and I knew a lot about their problems out
there. And while he disconcerts some people
about, like his remark about Hanoi, I bet you back
into the Stone Age, In retrospect, what better
could you have done? So, I don't feel it's as crude
as people feel it is. I think it's a little more
reasoned than that. But he is a hard man, a damn hard
man. He's a hard man to know. But he does mean what he
says, and he made a fighting force that I think kept
this country
so it didn't have to go to war for a while. Because
that's all we had. We didn't have another thing to
fight with. And when you take it, those crews set up
a third of them airborne at a time around the Boy,
that is a killer. That is a killing operation. And
he was able to do it, he was able to get his crews to do
it, he got them to believe in it, and they did a very
good job of it. And that's a good commander in my
book. Now, of course, there was some problems
between tactical air command and strategic air
command. Were you at all involved with that? Well,
yeah, but that's just a running thing that goes on
all the time. It isn't really something to worry
too much about, I don't think. It's real serious to
the guy who isn't getting the money in that year's
budget to get his airplanes, and he believes what
he says and feels strongly about it and fights
about it, and good for him. But it isn't really,
they're not fighting each other's missions.
They're just fighting for the resources they
think they need to do their job. So I don't really
pay much attention to those. Spike Mollmeyer had
tack and got it organized and got it going. And I'm
sure he had arguments with everybody, but he'd
fight a circle saw if he needed to to get one more
airplane or one more whatever he needed. to make a,
make his command go. So, I don't think there's
anything serious about those kind of fights.
Well, I think that what we ought to do is, is stop
here and get together again. Very good, very good.
I am terribly sorry about the last time, because